README.md, before:

# Auralith Data Pipeline

A production-grade, scalable data collection and processing pipeline for training large language models and multimodal AI systems.

[![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: Apache 2.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-green.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

## Overview

Auralith Data Pipeline is a modular, enterprise-ready system for:

- **Collecting** data from 20+ open-source datasets (HuggingFace, Common Crawl, etc.)
- **Preprocessing** with deduplication, quality filtering, and PII removal
- **Extracting** content from PDFs, documents, images, audio, and video
- **Tokenizing** text and multimodal content
- **Sharding** into efficient SafeTensors format for distributed training
- **Storing** on HuggingFace Hub, S3, GCS, or local storage

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/AuralithAI/Auralith-Data-Pipeline.git
cd Auralith-Data-Pipeline

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/Mac
# or .\venv\Scripts\activate  # Windows

# Install dependencies
pip install -e ".[all]"
```

### CLI Usage

```bash
# List available datasets
auralith-pipeline list-datasets

# Collect Wikipedia
auralith-pipeline collect --dataset wikipedia --max-samples 10000

# Upload to HuggingFace Hub
auralith-pipeline upload --source ./data/shards --dest hf://AuralithAI/training-data
```

### Python API

```python
from auralith_pipeline import Pipeline, PipelineConfig
from auralith_pipeline.sources import HuggingFaceSource

# Configure pipeline
config = PipelineConfig.from_preset("production")

# Create and run pipeline
pipeline = Pipeline(config)
pipeline.add_source(HuggingFaceSource("wikipedia", split="train"))

stats = pipeline.run(max_samples=1_000_000)
print(f"Processed {stats.total_samples:,} samples")
```

## Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| Multi-source ingestion | HuggingFace, Common Crawl, web scraping, local files |
| MinHash deduplication | Remove near-duplicate content at scale |
| Quality filtering | Length, language, toxicity, special char ratio |
| PII removal | Automatic detection and redaction |
| Document extraction | PDF, DOCX, PPTX, XLSX, HTML, Markdown |
| Multimodal support | Images, audio, video with embedding generation |
| SafeTensors shards | Fast, memory-mapped, secure format |
| Cloud storage | HuggingFace Hub, S3, GCS, Azure Blob |
| CI/CD ready | GitHub Actions workflows included |

## Project Structure

```
Auralith-Data-Pipeline/
├── src/auralith_pipeline/    # Main package
│   ├── config/               # Configuration
│   ├── sources/              # Data sources
│   ├── preprocessing/        # Cleaning & filtering
│   ├── extraction/           # Content extraction
│   ├── tokenization/         # Tokenizers
│   ├── sharding/             # Shard creation
│   ├── storage/              # Upload/download
│   └── utils/                # Utilities
├── tests/                    # Test suite
├── scripts/                  # Utility scripts
├── configs/                  # Example configs
└── docs/                     # Documentation
```

## Configuration

```yaml
# configs/production.yaml
pipeline:
  output_dir: ./data/shards
  
sources:
  - type: huggingface
    path: wikipedia
    max_samples: 10000000
    
preprocessing:
  deduplicate: true
  quality_filter: true
  remove_pii: true
  
sharding:
  format: safetensors
  max_size_mb: 1000
  compression: zstd
```

## Available Datasets

| Dataset | Size | Description |
|---------|------|-------------|
| wikipedia | 20GB | English Wikipedia |
| the_pile | 800GB | Diverse text mixture |
| redpajama | 1.2TB | LLaMA training data |
| c4 | 750GB | Cleaned Common Crawl |
| the_stack | 3TB | Source code |
| arxiv | 50GB | Research papers |

## Environment Variables

```bash
# HuggingFace Hub (required for upload)
export HF_TOKEN=hf_xxxxxxxxxxxxx

# AWS S3 (optional)
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=xxxxx
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=xxxxx
```

## Development

```bash
# Setup dev environment
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest tests/ -v

# Run linting
black src/ tests/
ruff check src/ tests/
```

## License

Apache License 2.0 - See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

Built with love by [AuralithAI](https://github.com/AuralithAI)

Commit message:

High-Level Architecture Diagram - Visual ASCII diagram showing complete data flow through all pipeline stages
Data Sources → Preprocessing → Extraction → Tokenization → Sharding → Storage
Component Architecture - Detailed breakdown of each module:

Data Sources - Various ingestion methods with data format specifications
Preprocessing - Text normalization, deduplication (MinHash), quality filtering, PII removal
Extraction - Multi-modal content (PDF, Images, Audio, Video)
Tokenization - Token conversion, chunking, attention masks
Sharding - SafeTensors format, compression, metadata tracking
Storage - Multiple backend support (HuggingFace, S3, GCS, Azure)
Data Flow Examples - Complete pipeline execution walkthrough with code samples

Performance Considerations - Memory management, deduplication efficiency, tokenization speed, storage optimization

Extension Points - Examples for adding custom sources, preprocessing, and storage backends

Monitoring, Deployment & Security - Logging, statistics, Docker, Kubernetes, and security best practices

README.md, after:

# Auralith Data Pipeline

A production-grade, scalable data collection and processing pipeline for training large language models and multimodal AI systems.

[![Python 3.10+](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![License: Apache 2.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-green.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)

## Overview

Auralith Data Pipeline is a modular, enterprise-ready system for:

- **Collecting** data from 20+ open-source datasets (HuggingFace, Common Crawl, etc.)
- **Preprocessing** with deduplication, quality filtering, and PII removal
- **Extracting** content from PDFs, documents, images, audio, and video
- **Tokenizing** text and multimodal content
- **Sharding** into efficient SafeTensors format for distributed training
- **Storing** on HuggingFace Hub, S3, GCS, or local storage

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/AuralithAI/Auralith-Data-Pipeline.git
cd Auralith-Data-Pipeline

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # Linux/Mac
# or .\venv\Scripts\activate  # Windows

# Install dependencies
pip install -e ".[all]"
```

### CLI Usage

```bash
# List available datasets
auralith-pipeline list-datasets

# Collect Wikipedia
auralith-pipeline collect --dataset wikipedia --max-samples 10000

# Upload to HuggingFace Hub
auralith-pipeline upload --source ./data/shards --dest hf://AuralithAI/training-data
```

### Python API

```python
from auralith_pipeline import Pipeline, PipelineConfig
from auralith_pipeline.sources import HuggingFaceSource

# Configure pipeline
config = PipelineConfig.from_preset("production")

# Create and run pipeline
pipeline = Pipeline(config)
pipeline.add_source(HuggingFaceSource("wikipedia", split="train"))

stats = pipeline.run(max_samples=1_000_000)
print(f"Processed {stats.total_samples:,} samples")
```

## Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| Multi-source ingestion | HuggingFace, Common Crawl, web scraping, local files |
| MinHash deduplication | Remove near-duplicate content at scale |
| Quality filtering | Length, language, toxicity, special char ratio |
| PII removal | Automatic detection and redaction |
| Document extraction | PDF, DOCX, PPTX, XLSX, HTML, Markdown |
| Multimodal support | Images, audio, video with embedding generation |
| SafeTensors shards | Fast, memory-mapped, secure format |
| Cloud storage | HuggingFace Hub, S3, GCS, Azure Blob |
| CI/CD ready | GitHub Actions workflows included |

## Architecture & Documentation

For a comprehensive understanding of the pipeline architecture, data flow, and component interactions, see the **[Architecture Documentation](docs/ARCHITECTURE.md)**. It includes:

- High-level system design with visual diagrams
- Detailed component descriptions and data formats
- Complete data flow examples
- Performance considerations and optimization tips
- Extension points for custom components
- Deployment and security guidelines

## Configuration

```yaml
# configs/production.yaml
pipeline:
  output_dir: ./data/shards
  
sources:
  - type: huggingface
    path: wikipedia
    max_samples: 10000000
    
preprocessing:
  deduplicate: true
  quality_filter: true
  remove_pii: true
  
sharding:
  format: safetensors
  max_size_mb: 1000
  compression: zstd
```

## Available Datasets

| Dataset | Size | Description |
|---------|------|-------------|
| wikipedia | 20GB | English Wikipedia |
| the_pile | 800GB | Diverse text mixture |
| redpajama | 1.2TB | LLaMA training data |
| c4 | 750GB | Cleaned Common Crawl |
| the_stack | 3TB | Source code |
| arxiv | 50GB | Research papers |

## Environment Variables

```bash
# HuggingFace Hub (required for upload)
export HF_TOKEN=hf_xxxxxxxxxxxxx

# AWS S3 (optional)
export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=xxxxx
export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=xxxxx
```

## Development

```bash
# Setup dev environment
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Run tests
pytest tests/ -v

# Run linting
black src/ tests/
ruff check src/ tests/
```

## License

Apache License 2.0 - See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

Built with love by [AuralithAI](https://github.com/AuralithAI)
